[Docs] Add 8.18.0 release notes and what's new page (#212637)
elastic/kibana: docs/CHANGELOG.asciidoc

include::upgrade-notes.asciidoc[]

[[release-notes-8.18.0]]
== {kib} 8.18.0
coming::[8.18.0]

Review the following information about the {kib} 8.18.0 release.

[float]
[[breaking-changes-8.18.0]]
=== Breaking changes

Breaking changes can prevent your application from optimal operation and performance.
Before you upgrade to 8.18.0, review the breaking changes, then mitigate the impact to your application.

[discrete]
[[breaking-201100]]
.Added sub-feature privileges for managing Synthetics private locations.
[%collapsible]
====
*Details* +
Permissions to manage private locations in the Synthetics app can now be granted with sub-feature privileges using the API or Kibana's role management UI. For more information, refer to ({kibana-pull}201100[#201100]).
====
      
[float]
[[deprecations-8.18.0]]
=== Deprecations

The following functionality is deprecated in 8.18.0, and will be removed in 9.0.0.
Deprecated functionality does not have an immediate impact on your application, but we strongly recommend
you make the necessary updates after you upgrade to 8.18.0.

[discrete]

> .Deprecated all security v1 endpoints

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Deprecated all security v1 endpoints.
```

Elastic Observability solution::
* Default to "native" function calling if the connector configuration is not exposed ({kibana-pull}210455[#210455]).
* Adds selector syntax support to the log source profile ({kibana-pull}206937[#206937]).
* Use rule form to create rules in Observability ({kibana-pull}206774[#206774]).
* Display stacktrace in the Logs overview tab ({kibana-pull}204521[#204521]).
* Adds ability to install a Knowledge Base from the AI Assistant settings ({kibana-pull}206408[#206408]).
* Improves tool choice handling in Observability AI Assistant client ({kibana-pull}203928[#203928]).
* Introduces cursor pagination in Find SLO API ({kibana-pull}203712[#203712]).
* Adds a flyout to the table view in Infrastructure Inventory ({kibana-pull}202646[#202646]).
Elastic Security solution::
For the Elastic Security 8.18.0 release information, refer to {security-guide}/release-notes.html[_Elastic Security Solution Release Notes_].
Kibana platform::
* Ability to set the color mode of the UI to Dark, Light, or System, where System syncs the color mode to your system settings ({kibana-pull}203406[#203406]).

> * The new space solution view is now available for on-prem users. The space solution views allows solution-centric navigation similar to the serverless offering. ({kibana-pull}203239[#203239]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The new space solution view is now available for on-prem users. This view allows solution-centric navigation similar to the Serverless offering. ({kibana-pull}203239[#203239]).
```

Kibana security::

> * Added support for human readable name attribute for saved objects audit events ({kibana-pull}206644[#206644]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Adds support for human readable `name` attribute for Saved Objects audit events ({kibana-pull}206644[#206644]).
```

* Enable inference connector for Automatic Import ({kibana-pull}206111[#206111]).
* Creates Kibana Security session index only if the `kibana_security_session_1` index or the reindexed version does not exist. ({kibana-pull}204097[#204097]).
* Adds support for explicit indication of whether an endpoint is restricted to operator-only users at the route definition level. ({kibana-pull}196583[#196583]).
* Enhanced Role management to manage larger number of roles by adding server side filtering, pagination and querying ({kibana-pull}194630[#194630]).
Machine Learning::

> * Updates the `bucket_span` for ML jobs in the security_host module ({kibana-pull}209663[#209663]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Updates the `bucket_span` for ML jobs in the `security_host` module ({kibana-pull}209663[#209663]).
```

* Adds Spaces column to Anomaly Detection, Data Frame Analytics and Trained Models management pages ({kibana-pull}206696[#206696]).
* Consistent Layout and UI Enhancements for ML Pages ({kibana-pull}203813[#203813]).
* Syncs ML saved objects to all spaces ({kibana-pull}202175[#202175]).
* Adds action to add log rate analysis to a case ({kibana-pull}201549[#201549]).
Management::
* Updates JSON schemas for code editors ({kibana-pull}207706[#207706]).
* Updates kNN search and query template autocompletion ({kibana-pull}207187[#207187]).
* Adds support for rawValue in URL labels ({kibana-pull}204192[#204192]).
* Allows boolean fields to be colored ({kibana-pull}203498[#203498]).
* Transforms: Improve messages for recovered alerts ({kibana-pull}205721[#205721]).

> * Transforms: Improve percentiles agg validation ({kibana-pull}197816[#197816]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Transforms: Improves validation for percentile aggregations ({kibana-pull}197816[#197816]).
```

* Allow panel to extend past viewport on resize ({kibana-pull}208828[#208828]).
* Disable pointer events on drag and resize ({kibana-pull}208647[#208647]).
* Remove use of `fr` unit ({kibana-pull}208437[#208437]).
* Restores the "Show missing dataView" error message in case of missing data source in *Lens* ({kibana-pull}208363[#208363]).
* Make drag preview absolute positioned ({kibana-pull}208247[#208247]).
* Improve help text of creator and view count features on dashboard listing page ({kibana-pull}202488[#202488]).
* Debounce time slider selections ({kibana-pull}201885[#201885]).
Data ingestion and Fleet::
* Support `is_default` on integration deployment modes ({kibana-pull}208284[#208284]).
* Fixes a UI error caused when an agent becomes orphan ({kibana-pull}207746[#207746]).
* Restrict non-local Elasticsearch output types for agentless integrations and policies ({kibana-pull}207296[#207296]).
* Fixes bulk actions timing out ({kibana-pull}205735[#205735]).
* Fixes generation of dynamic mapping for objects with specific subfields ({kibana-pull}204104[#204104]).

> * Fixes stuck in updating logic when an agent is scheduled for upgrading ({kibana-pull}202126[#202126]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixes logic to ensure that agents are only considered stuck in updating when an upgrade fails ({kibana-pull}202126[#202126]).
```

> Discover and ES|QL::

Reviewer 2: This is mixed here with Discover:

- ES|QL editor fixes are applied everywhere the editor exists so this gives the impression that they have been fixed only in Discover
- A new ES|QL section is needed here

These need to move to an ES|QL editor section

* Fixes WHERE autocomplete with MATCH before LIMIT ({kibana-pull}210607[#210607]).
* Makes WHERE replacement ranges correctly generated for every case ({kibana-pull}209684[#209684]).
* Fixes formatting and sorting for custom ES|QL variables ({kibana-pull}209360[#209360]).
* Apply the time range to the fields fetch in the editor ({kibana-pull}208490[#208490]).
* Fixes several query history issues
* Allows the editor suggestions to be visible when the inline documentation flyout is open
* Fixes editor cursor jumpiness

Author: Done in [5456d6c](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/212637/commits/5456d6cfc096124c9abb03d425a8ec6042b7b97b)

Thanks @stratoula! I'll check if I can improve the release notes template to automate this split for the next releases

* Fixes editor cursor jumpiness ({kibana-pull}202389[#202389]).
Elastic Observability solution::
* Pass system message to inferenceCliente.chatComplete ({kibana-pull}211263[#211263]).
* Fixes connector test in MKI ({kibana-pull}211235[#211235]).
* Adds knowledge base re-indexing when encountering `semantic_text` bug ({kibana-pull}210386[#210386]).
* Update colors in the AI Assistant icon ({kibana-pull}210233[#210233]).
* Update the simulate function calling setting to support "auto" ({kibana-pull}209628[#209628]).
* Fixes an issue where APM charts were rendered without required transaction type or service name, causing excessive alerts to appear ({kibana-pull}209552[#209552]).
* Fixes conversations test in MKI ({kibana-pull}208649[#208649]).
* Knowledge base installation updates ({kibana-pull}208250[#208250]).
* Return an empty object for tool arguments if empty ({kibana-pull}207943[#207943]).
* Fixes Open Explore in Discover link in a new tab ({kibana-pull}207346[#207346]).
* Updating an SLO with non-breaking changes is considered a breaking change when the SLO is running on outdated resources ({kibana-pull}207090[#207090]).

> * Fixes and error caused when using the Ollama model locally ({kibana-pull}206739[#206739]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixes an error that occurs when using the Ollama model locally ({kibana-pull}206739[#206739]).
```

- `GET /api/security/v1/oidc` has been replaced by GET `/api/security/oidc/callback`
- `POST /api/security/v1/oidc` has been replaced by POST `/api/security/oidc/initiate_login`
- `POST /api/security/v1/saml` has been replaced by POST `/api/security/saml/callback`
- `GET /api/security/v1/me` has been removed with no replacement.

For more information, refer to {kibana-pull}199656[#199656].

*Impact* + 
Any HTTP API calls to the `v1` Kibana security endpoints will fail with a 404 status code starting from version 9.0.0.
Third party OIDC and SAML identity providers configured with `v1` endpoints will no longer work.

*Action* +
Update any OIDC and SAML identity providers to reference the corresponding replacement endpoint listed above.
Remove references to the `/api/security/v1/me` endpoint from any automations, applications, tooling, and scripts.
====

[discrete]
[[deprecation-201625]]
.Deprecated Logs UI configuration settings.
[%collapsible]
====
*Details* +
Legacy and unused configuration settings were deprecated for the Logs UI. For more information, refer to ({kibana-pull}201625[#201625]).
====
      
[float]
[[features-8.18.0]]

> === Features

Reviewer 3: Could we add a section for cases where we add the following https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/201948?

Reviewer: https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/201948 has the `release_note:enhancement` label, so I'm adding it to the Enhancements section. Should it be in Features instead?

Reviewer 3: Sorry, my mistake. It is an enhancement. Better to be in the Enhancements section.

{kib} 8.18.0 adds the following new and notable features.

Dashboards & Visualizations::
* ES|QL charts now allow the creation of controls in dashboards. You can control a part of the query such as a field, an interval or a value.
* Improves Dashboard layout engine ({kibana-pull}205341[#205341]).
* Adds the ability to rotate the X axis label in *Lens* heatmaps ({kibana-pull}202143[#202143]).
Data ingestion and Fleet::
* Adds next steps and actions to the agentless integrations flyout ({kibana-pull}203824[#203824]).
* Adds support for columns when exporting agents to CSV ({kibana-pull}203103[#203103]).
* Adds status tracking for agentless integrations ({kibana-pull}199567[#199567]).
Discover::
* Adds in-table search ({kibana-pull}206454[#206454]).

> Elastic Observability solution::

Reviewer 3: Could we also add the work done in https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/206774?

Reviewer: https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/206774 has the `release_note:enhancement` label, so it was already included in the Enhancements and bug fixes section below. If it should be in the Features section instead, I'm happy to move it :)

Reviewer 3: Again my mistake 🙂 . Yes, it should be part of the Enhancements section.

Elastic Security solution::
For the Elastic Security 8.18.0 release information, refer to {security-guide}/release-notes.html[_Elastic Security Solution Release Notes_].
Kibana security::
* The Automatic Import functionality is now generally available ({kibana-pull}208523[#208523]).
Machine Learning::
* Adds new View job detail flyouts for Anomaly detection and Data Frame Analytics ({kibana-pull}207141[#207141]).
* Adds simple flyout-based file upload to Search ({kibana-pull}206864[#206864]).
* Adds a new security module to detect anomalous activity in host-based logs ({kibana-pull}195582[#195582]).

For more information about the features introduced in 8.18.0, refer to <<whats-new,What's new in 8.18>>.

[[enhancements-and-bug-fixes-v8.18.0]]
=== Enhancements and bug fixes

For detailed information about the 8.18.0 release, review the enhancements and bug fixes.

[float]
[[enhancement-v8.18.0]]
=== Enhancements
Alerting::
* Allows pre-configured connectors to opt-in to exposing their config by setting `exposeConfig` ({kibana-pull}207654[#207654]).
* Adds new flyout to rule form library, responsive design and illustration to rule form page ({kibana-pull}206141[#206141]).

> * Case templates are now generally available ({kibana-pull}205940[#205940]).

Reviewer 3: Should we remove this as we mentioned it in the whats new page? If not, I think it is better if we move it to the Cases section.

Reviewer: Thanks @cnasikas, I've moved it to the Cases section

> * Ability to pass any field to ServiceNow using the ServiceNow SecOps connector with a JSON field called "additional fields" ({kibana-pull}201948[#201948]).

Reviewer 3: This is a duplication of the first item in the Cases section.

Reviewer: Thanks for catching this! Fixed

include::upgrade-notes.asciidoc[]

[[release-notes-8.18.0]]
== {kib} 8.18.0
coming::[8.18.0]

Review the following information about the {kib} 8.18.0 release.

> 

Reviewer 4: Hopefully my first attempt at adding to the release notes isn't too broken - 

```suggestion
[[known-issues-8.18.0]]
=== Known issues

// tag::known-issue-211850[]
.Upgrade Assistant - Rollup jobs need to be stopped before rollup indices are reindexed.
[%collapsible]
====
*Details* +
Rollup indices, like all indices, created in 7.x or earlier need to be reindexed in preparation for migration to 9.0. However, in addition to the normal reindex process the rollup job also needs to be accounted for. It needs to be stopped before reindexing begins otherwise there may be a gap in rollup data. The job can be restarted when reindexing is complete.

This needs to be performed manually until addressed in the upgrade assistant code.

For more information, refer to https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/211850[#211850].
====
// end::known-issue-211850[]
```

Author: @mattkime Thank you for adding this. Since this is about upgrading to 9.0, should it be in the 9.0 release notes instead (or in addition at least)?

Reviewer 4: @florent-leborgne I guess this gets into how people read release notes before upgrading. The behavior and necessary action is in 8.18.0 but I guess they'll have likely read the 9.0 release notes most recently. Perhaps it should be in both places.

Author: 👍 I'll duplicate your entry in the [9.0 release notes](https://github.com/elastic/stack-docs/pull/2994)

Author: ```suggestion
[float]
[[known-issues-8.18.0]]
=== Known issues

// tag::known-issue-211850[]
.Upgrade Assistant - Rollup jobs need to be stopped before rollup indices are reindexed.
[%collapsible]
====
*Details* +
Rollup indices, like all indices, created in 7.x or earlier need to be reindexed in preparation for migration to 9.0. However, in addition to the normal reindex process the rollup job also needs to be accounted for. It needs to be stopped before reindexing begins otherwise there may be a gap in rollup data. The job can be restarted when reindexing is complete.

This needs to be performed manually until addressed in the upgrade assistant code.

For more information, refer to https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/211850[#211850].
====
// end::known-issue-211850[]
```
Adding missing [float] to the suggestion
